Search transcript
Uh once everyone is downloaded the slides generally acceptably comfortable
with the slides uh let me know just general raise of hand and then we could
probably start the review
>> for Google class or for Google meet. Can everyone hear me properly?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So again, the slides are on Piaza. I
made a post about it. Uh download them and we can follow along.
Everyone ready? Everyone have the slides open?
Okay. So for starters, uh this review session
is pretty early for the ex like compared to the exam time. I believe your exam is
on the 7th. So you guys do have ample time to study. So in my opinion, the
best use of your time beyond studying the material is you should be extremely
comfortable with hexodimal, binary, and decimal conversions. And I think you
should personally master cache translations.
So just to preface I'm focusing on like the largest parts of what the exam
covers, not focusing on everything. And the biggest section on the exam that I
am not covering is the homeworks. I will not be covering any questions related to
the homeworks. I didn't work on them. I don't cover them that well.
Any questions for now? Okay. So just to warm up and get us in
the groove, I will we'll just do some definitions. Again, not all of the
definitions are listed here. I didn't do all of the ones that on the list, but I
did a good chunk of them. So, different pointers or expressions accessing the
same location in memory is called memory aliasing, right?
Nonvolatile memory designed to hold fixed information such as firmware that
is not normally rerun during ordinary operations. Basically, read only memory.
Again, if anyone has any questions about the definitions,
uh, I'm right here. Feel free to raise your hand. I will try to give a better
explanation of it. I will assume that everything I'm covering is understood by
everyone. So if you guys have a question or want me to go more in depth on it,
you need to raise your hand. You need to let me know. For Google Meet, feel free
to talk. I will hear you. A signal that causes the processor to
temporarily suspend normal execution and transfer control to a handler is known
as an interrupt. Removing a block from the cache, usually
to make room for another block, is known as cash eviction.
Memory that loses its stored contents when power is removed, is known as
volatile memory. A communication pathway used to connect
peripheral devices to the rest of the computer system. This is known as the IO
bus. A communication pathway that carries
data, addresses, and control signals between the memory controller and main
memory is the memory bus. A mechanism that transfers data between
an IO device and main memory without requiring the CPU to copy each
individual piece of data is DMA or direct memory access.
A programmer specified condition that is checked to catch programming errors. If
the check fails, the program typically reports the failure and terminates. This
is called an assertion. A processor technique that guesses a
branch's outcome so execution can proceed before the actual outcome is
known. This is known as branch prediction.
An optimization that moves a calculation to a place where it executes fewer times
such as outside a loop while preserving behavior. This is known as code motion.
A processor design that can issue multiple instructions during a single
clock cycle. This is known as supercaler.
The time required for one operation to complete measured from its start until
its result is available. This is latency.
The amount of work completed per unit of time such as instructions completed per
second is throughput. a cash write policy that updates the
cache copy and marks it dirty postponing the update to the next memory level
until eviction or a flush. This is the right back policy.
A cach write policy that sends every right to a cache block through to the
next memory level as well. This is known as a right through
code that can execute correctly at different loading addresses without
modifying the code itself to account for its location. This is position
independent code. Matching a reference to a function or
global variable with the definition that prov provides it. This is symbol
resolution. Adjusting address references in code and
data to match the locations assigned to program components. This is called
relocation. So the warmup is over. I hope everyone's
now acclimated and I hope everyone's now here. I think the biggest section of
this exam will be caches. So I will probably spend an ample amount of time
here. Before we start on caches, is there any specific thing anyone's
struggling with in terms of caches? Okay.
So why do caches work? Specifically, they work because of locality, right?
When we're thinking about our memory hierarchy here, I'm sure everyone's
familiar with that. But as you go deeper down, things take longer to get and
memory is more dense as you go down, right? It'll hold more information, but
it takes longer to get to. Locality is a great usage of code that allows caches
to work. That like basically you store data in a faster to reach location that
allows you to access it more frequently. That is essentially the definition of
caching, right? So we have the principle of locality. Programs tend to reuse
recently accessed locations and access locations near one another. Basically,
you can split this up into two things. Temporal locality, which is something
accessed recently will be reused again. An example being reusing the same memory
address over and over again. And then we have spatial locality. Locations near
something just access will be accessed soon. The example being an array, right?
Think of a for loop and indexing through that array. we first go to the zeroth
index and then the next iteration of the loop is the first index. This is how
branch prediction works, right? Branch prediction is just expecting the for
loop to cover the next few indexes. So another thing to note about caches is
that caches load things in entire blocks, right? You don't just load one
little in one little bite or one bit, right? You load an entire cache block.
Now the cache block size is dependent on the cache system you have and what is
dictated. But as example suppose an integer is four bytes and each cache
block holds 64 bytes. A of0 is the start of a cache block and the cache starts
empty. Is it a hit or a miss for a z? Yes. A of z is a miss because nothing is
loaded into the cache yet. But what about a of 8?
Yes. Why is that so? because the entire block was loaded. Right? Now the thing
is you need to identify how big your cache block is based on your cache
parameters. So in here for our example 64 bytes for each cache block holding
divided by four bytes per integer means we can hold 16 integers. So that means
our array each array index holding an integer means that it will load a a of
zero through a of 15. Meaning a of 16 will be another miss causing the cache
to load the next block. Any questions?
Okay. Cache organization. A cache is designed and organized into sets, lines,
and blocks. I think visualizing this is extremely important for your exam. It it
allow you to help with cache design trade-offs which we will cover later.
But essentially, you have a bunch of sets and each and then you have a bunch
of lines. The lines are basically like the blocks.
So an example is a cache with four sets, two lines per set and eight byte blocks
holds. And you basically use the formula C= S * E * B. And that's how you get the
size of the cache. So for an example problem, a cache is
used in a system with 32-bit addresses. It contains eight sets, four lines per
set, and 32 byt blocks. If we use the formula, we can see that the cache
holds,024 bytes. Any questions?
Okay. So, another thing to cover is cache misses, right? We already talked
about the first one in our example here, but you have a compulsory miss.
Basically, this is the first time you're accessing a block in a cache and after
that it is loaded within the cache, right? You also have conflict misses
where blocks are competing for the same set. This is covered later, but
basically each block will have a pre pre-ordained set it belongs to. And then
we have capacity. A capacity miss is when the cache is full and it need like
you miss or you conflict specifically because there's just they can't hold any
more information. Right? So we have different cache architectures
and how we in how we decide where our our blocks go in our sets. Right? We
have a directmapped architecture where a memory block can only go in one specific
line. So E is one line per set is equal to one. There's a design trade-off here
in which it's simple inex inexpensive hardware and it's a fast lookup, right?
Because if only one block spec like is accord like attached to one line, it can
only go in one place. So you really only have to check one thing, right? it is
more prone to conflict misses because one line can only go in one set or you
tend to have similar blocks that each like if I were to draw this out you have
your cache and you say let's say cache block one goes into this set right but
then obviously your cache is smaller than the data you have that's the but
that's the whole point of caching right it's small but fast so then you also
have cache block 2 three and four and they might also go in the exact same set
they might share it basically. But if you if they can only go in that one set,
then you're bound to have more conflict misses as they all use that one set.
The next architecture is an e-way set associative. Any of the e- lines in one
specific set, meaning you can have multiple lines per set. What are the
benefits of this? It reduces conflict misses by allowing multiple blocks per
set. Now instead of only one cache block
getting one set, you can have all the cache blocks 1 2 3 and four can equally
use a set. They all don't just belong there. So it reduces conflict misses,
but it does increase hardware complexity and potential lookup time because now if
you have a cache block, you need to not just check for it belonging. It's not
just a check if it's there. you have to check if every if like if multiple
blocks because each block can go into one set. So lookup time does increase.
Finally, you have the fully associative cache which is any line basically any
block can go anywhere in the cache. Meaning you only have one set.
So it eliminates conflict misses generally because every like any block
can go anywhere. It doesn't actually matter. They don't have anything
nowhere. No one's telling cache block one that it has to go in that specific
set. But the problem is is it must check tags
across all cache lines and choose a replacement. It's expensive to basically
walk through your entire cache over and over again and it's complex. Any
questions?
>> Um, excuse me. Uh, is this lecture being recorded? Sorry, I just didn't see the
red dot.
>> It is being recorded not on Google Meets but on OBS.
>> Oh, okay. Got it. Thank you.
>> Okay. Design trade-offs are like a guaranteed
topic on your exam. So, we will go over a little bit more of them. Specifically,
the nitty-gritty, not exactly just cache architectures, but we have like let's
say your cache has higher associivity. Like let's say you're given a question
that you have this cache and now the associivity is raised, right?
So, your c what is fixed? Your cap capacity and your block size is still
fixed, right? But the structural effect of higher associivity is you have fewer
sets but more lines per set, right? Because if cache blocks share a set, the
way to raise your associivity is to have more lines, right? So that way more like
you can add more lines per set. They'll be able to share into each other more.
So what is a performance trade-off? Having higher sensitivity usually means
you get fewer conflict misses. You have to do more tag comparisons though as you
have to like basically in a set you have a bunch of lines and you have to check
which tag belongs to each line, right? So having more lines per set means you
have to do more tag comparisons. You have more what is it? Yes, you have
more replacement complexity and potentially a longer hit time as you
still have to traverse through each line. What does lower associivity do?
You still have a fixed capacity and you still have a fixed block size, but the
structural effect is now you have more sets and fewer lines per set. It's
basically the exact opposite of higher associivity, right? With more sets, you
have simpler and potentially faster lookups, right? Because you have fewer
lines per set, but you have more conflict misses because each cache block
can only go in its pre-desated set. Then if you have if you have uh less lines
per set then you just have to check more like each cache block that shares a set
with other cache blocks then obviously you're going to have more conflict
misses if you have less lines. Now what does the change of larger
blocks do? What is fixed is your capacity and your associivity. Right?
But think about what larger blocks do. A line can only a line can only hold so
much and a set can only hold so much. So you'll have fewer blocks and sets.
Right? So the performance trade-off, you can
exploit spatial locality more. Larger blocks mean you can load more in, right?
We're going back to our original example of a of 0 through a of 15. If I have
larger block size, I might be able to load a of 0 through a of 20 or a of 30.
That's just simply because I bring in the entire block on a compulsory miss.
But unused bytes waste space. Say I load in a of 0 through a of 30. That's great.
It's more than a of 15. But if I end up not using the rest of them, then it's
really just wasted space. Fewer distinct blocks fit because you just have less
space because the blocks are larger and miss penalty generally increases. Why
does miss penalty increase? Because if your cache block is bigger and then you
miss that is more you're obviously because you're like the bigger they are,
the harder they fall, right? You're just going to suffer more damage.
On the off on on the flip side, what do smaller blocks do? Again, the same
things hold fixed or capacity and associativity, but it's basically the
opposite. You get more blocks in sets, right? So, it's less wasted data and
shorter transfers because you just have less information to go through, but you
can get more misses and during sequential access like you can get more
misses during sequential access and more tag entries to store, right? Because you
have smaller blocks, you'll get more blocks, aka more lines, right? Which
means more tag entries per set to go through and sift through, right? And
another problem is sequential access. Like the bigger blocks, if you have
smaller blocks, now a of 0 through a of 15 is not possible, right? It might be a
of 0 through a of 8. Meaning if I'm indexing through an array, then I need a
of 9, I have to comp I have to miss and load in a of 9 through a of 16 or
something, right? Any questions?
Okay, so finally, what do more sets do? What's what stays fixed is associivity
and block size. But more sets means you have a larger cache capacity. What this
means is you usually have fewer capacity or conflict misses because you have more
sets, but more hardware area power and potentially longer hit time. As you
increase the number of sets, you have to index through more and more sets and
check their tags. More sets does not necess like more sets
does not necessarily mean less lines. So being basically you're just increasing
the size of your cache. On the flip side, what do fewer sets do?
Again, what remains fixed is associivity and block size, but you have now just
have a smaller cache. Smaller, so it's potentially faster hardware. You just
don't have to search through as much stuff, but you have fewer blocks fit and
misses can increase, right? Self-explanatory, just the reverse of
what more sets do. So, to go talk about caches deeper, we
need to talk about cache addresses, right? An address tells the cache where
to look and what to check, right? So you have a bunch of information. You have a
bunch of blocks. You have lines and you have sets. But you don't actually know
how to access the information inside of them. That's what the cache address is
for. Right? So a cast address divides the address bits into three parts.
Right? You have a tag, you have a set index, and you have the block offset.
Anyone don't know what those are? Okay. So I like to them as TSB. I think
Professor Benz does the same. uh you have the formula down there which
I included but I don't particularly follow it. I don't particularly find it
helpful, but for running through how to use a cache address to find a cache
block, you first use the set index to select a set, right? Then you check the
lines in that set for a matching tag. And after you find if both of those
conditions are true and correct, then you can check if the matching count if
the valid bit is one. The valid bit is not one, you the cache block doesn't
exist, right? And on a hit, you use the off select to select the requested bite
or starting position. Any questions?
Okay. So, how to do cash liquid questions? On the exam, at least when I
took the class, Professor Benz will give you a hexadeimal code. So, my first step
is convert hexodimal to binary. Then you need to split your bits into tag set and
block offset, right? The TSB. And then you traverse the cache, whatever is
provided to you, and find the indicated set. Check for the valid bit and
matching tag. If it's found, it's a hit and otherwise it's a miss.
Seems straightforward. Okay, we have a demo here, right? So,
what cache block does 0x1D refer to? Following our steps here, we take 0x1D
and we convert it, right? I don't know how familiar you guys are with the
conversion, but I've already basically if you scroll through and head of the
slides, I've already done everything. It's just like a guide for you to walk
through. So if you convert 0x1D you get 0 1 1 01 right and if we split it up
into our TSB using the image we see we have two bits of set two bits of block
offset and two bits of tag. So converting our TSB we have 01 1 and 01
right we're converting from binary to decimal is the next step. So 01 becomes
one 1 is three and 01 is one right. So if we look at our cache table we look at
our TSB it says set three right. So we go to set three. We scroll and we see
the valid bit is also one and we see the tag is one. So everything matches. So we
have a cache hit. Anyone confused how we got there?
Okay, another cache demo. What cache block does 0x69 refer to? So 0x69
converting it over is 011 01 0 01. Right? We have a problem here. If we
look at to the left and the diagram, we have two bits of set, two bits of block
offset, and three bits of tag, right? But we clearly have more bits than
necessary. We need to remove a leading zero. So if you do encounter a question
like this on the exam, remove the leading zero. Yeah. So then after that,
we convert to TSB which is 1 0 1 0 1 and then binary to decimal which is 621.
Right? And from that we get to look. So we look at the rows, we look at set two,
right? We see that there are multiple options for set two. But then we need to
check the validating tag and the valid bit right and we see only one of them ma
has a tag of six even though there are two sets of two right so we can identify
that cache block number five is the correct cache so we have a cash hit
any questions okay next up oh yes
>> uh generally I don't think questions like that would be posed
because that information is useful although it's the important it's the
least significant bit I don't have it on the slides but you can Google it
cash hit miss rate questions are the next big topic on your exam right there
I'm just covering this on like orders of magnitude so we for cash hit miss rate
questions we first must calculate the elements per block right elements per
block is basically equal to the block size divided by the element size. For
example, we have a block size of 16 bytes and an element size of 8 byt
doubles, right? Meaning we get two elements per block. Or if we have a
block size of 64 bytes and an element size of four byt integers, then we have
16 elements per block. So why does this actually matter on the on the slides for
the course, right? He professor Ben gave a bunch of listed details on the cache
assumptions, but on the exam there could be different cache assumptions. You
could not just have 32 by integers or and each integer being four bytes. You
could get doubles. So the fractions actually change and the fractions are
going to be the answers. What is the mis rate of this cache? Right?
So assuming sequential access to aligned initially uncashed blocks with each
block retaining its elements have been accessed. We have different miss rates.
Right? So we have one compulsory miss and then
one hit. Right? If we have two elements per block, if anyone's unclear how that
works. Okay, so then if we have four elements
per block, we have the one compulsory miss and then we load the entire cache
block. So then we'd have three hits, right? So our miss would be 1/4. And if
we have eight elements per block, we have one miss, then seven hits, 1/8,
etc., right? So typically arrays follow the form of
array, row, and then column. Right? So to move across a row, we would have two
0 and then 2 1 and then 2 two, right? The row stays the same and the column
moves. That's how we traverse across a row. And to traverse across AC across a
column, we would have the column bar move or no, the column bar stays the
same and the row moves. Apologies. So traversing a row moves through
consecutive elements while traversing through a column jumps through entire
rows. That is very important for your exam, right? That is basically how we
identify cache miss and hit rate. row is first and column is second. And you if
you want another way of say thinking about it, you want the first bracket to
be fixed and the second to change by one if the second is the innermost loop.
So the triple nested loops on your slides, right?
This is probably these are probably the examples that's going to be used to
identify cash hit missions something similar to what's there. In the
innermost loop, K will change while I and J stay fixed. Right? That is what we
want to focus on the innermost loop. Inspecting each array axis, we have a of
i k changes changes k in the second bracket. B of kj changes k in the first
bracket and c of i j does not change k. It writes after the loop finishes.
Right? We want to just focus on each axis to the array. Right? So assuming
the problem gives 64 byt blocks and eight byt doubles, we have if we look at
a misses 1/8 per inner iteration, which is pretty good. B misses one time per
inner iteration. So misses per inner iteration we just add them up we get
9/8s. So there are two array reads in the example. So our miss rate is just
going to be 98 divided by two because there are two array reads which means we
have a m rate of 56.25%. Any questions?
Yes.
>> Uh no.
>> Why would you think you could ignore them? Because they're so small. it ends
up not mattering.
>> Yeah,
>> it could lead to rounding issues. But generally on the exams, the numbers he
uses are small enough
>> to not lead to such problems. Right? So loop ordering notice. So for
vocabulary purposes, loop ordering changes which loop is outermost and
which is innermost, right? That's how we can modify what is what is good in terms
of a locality, right? The goal is to access data in an order that uses the
cache effectively. We want sequential axis, right? We want to traverse our
rows and not traverse our columns. For C arrays, neighboring elements within a
row are adjacent in memory. Making the second index change fastest, therefore
improves spatial locality. However, even with sequential access, a large matrix
may not fit in the cache. By the time the program needs an element again,
other accesses may have evicted it. Good spatial locality does not guarantee that
data survives until its next use. Right? Any questions?
Okay, so then we like the slides combine it with something called blocking.
Blocking, also called tiling, divides the computation into smaller matrix
regions. Your program repeatedly uses those regions while they can remain in
the cache. Within each small matrix multiplication, an element of A
contributes to several output elements and an element of B is used for several
output rows. Those repeated uses can happen close together.
I don't have the image, but on Professor Benz's slides, you've seen examples of
what tiling is. You basically split up your you basically split up it into even
further divisions and then you use it even more closely together, which is an
even better use of spatial and temporal locality. Temporal locality improves
because the same elements are reused before eviction and spatial locality is
exploited by traversing neighboring elements within tile rows.
>> Yes. Uh there is a complicated math formula
for how one would set up their tiling, but I don't think that's important to
the exam. It's more about the concept of blocking and blocking itself more than
how you would go go about setting up your tiling.
So then the next thing that's covered is average access time of your cache.
Average act average memory access time or MAT measures the average time needed
to satisfy a memory request. So AMAT equals hit time plus miss rate times
miss penalty. So miss rate is one minus hit rate. And the slides already talk
about why you would use miss rate over hit rate which I don't think that's
super important but it is covered. Hit time is the time spent checking the
cache and accessing its data. In this model, you spend that lookup time even
when the cache misses. Right? So if I want to get this block in my cache, even
if my lookup is a cash miss, I've still wasted the time trying to get to that
cache block. Right? So miss penalty is the additional time needed after a miss.
It does not include the lookup time already counted. And that's the website
I got it from. For example, a cash with a 90% hit rate has a 10% miss rate,
right? Seems reasonable. So the problem with the exam is that it
will extend this to multiple levels. And personally, I find that really
difficult. So with multiple caches, the miss penalty includes
>> Yes.
>> It's normally provided.
>> With multiple caches, the miss penalty includes the average time needed to
access the remaining levels. Right? We talked this was talked about in the
slides but you don't just have one cache right you have an L1 cache you have an
L2 cache you have an L3 cache you have main memory right
caches can use more caches it's basically like tiling so let T1 T2 and
T3 represent each cach's lookup time let M1 M2 and M3 represent their miss rates
time is the main memory access time so one cache then main memory so amat
equals T1 plus M1* T memory Okay, two caches then main memory amat= t1 plus m1
* t2 + m2 * t memory. Basically, the more cache levels you add, the formula
will have to adapt, right? And I'm just trying to show a pattern here.
So, we have an example. We want to find the average memory access time using the
following information. So, we see here we have an L1, L2, and L3 cache and main
memory and a LO and we have their local hit rates provided, right? And then we
see the time spent accessing this level. So for the solution for this, first we
convert the hit rates into miss rates, right? That's pretty standard. And then
we work from the bottom up. First we start at L3. Every request reaching L3
spends 20 nonds checking it. Half then requires another 100 ns for main memory.
Right? So average time starting at L3 equals T3 plus M3 * T memory which is
equal to 70 nonds. So then we've solved what L3 is. Then we move up to L2,
right? Every request reaching L2 spends 5 nonds checking it. The 20% miss that
miss continue to L3 where the average remaining time is 70 nconds, right? So
the average time starting at L2 is equal to T2 + M2 * the average time starting
at L3. That's why it's important we work from the bottom up. So we get 19 nonds
for L2. L3 still remains the same. Finally, we calculate the average
starting at L1. Every request spends one ncond checking L1. The 10% that miss
continue to L2 where the average remaining time is 19 nonds. So amat
equals T1 + M1* average time starting at L2. So we get 2.9 nconds. Right? So in
in total for our MAT we combine everything together and we get 2.9.
Any major questions?
>> Yes. penalty based on
>> uh not miss penalty more that just cash lookup time
>> but this is something we don't get
>> on the exam at least for when I took the class you will be given a chart similar
to what I've like what I've provided and you'll be asked to solve for the hit
rate or miss rate or whatever basically depending on different cache levels.
Uh why do you think that
>> the more caches you add like okay so the memory hierarchy right
L1 is the fastest right when we want information we immediately go to L1
Right? But L1 while it has a good hit rate of 90%, it is not always perfect.
Right? So if the information is not in L1, then we have to go to L2, right? And
L2 while it's also great, it's slower than L1, right? And but let's say L2
also misses, then we have to go to L3. And if L3 misses, we go to main memory,
right? And you don't want to go to main memory because that's really slow in
terms of clock cycles. So
the more like the more lower you go, the hit rate will like basically the time it
takes to get to that cache will be longer. So the more caches you add,
technically speaking, you'll have to keep going back and back because you if
you miss, you don't get that time back, right?
Okay, any more questions? We've covered caches unless anyone has
any further questions about caches that they have that I didn't cover already. I
think I've covered the important stuff for the exam, at least the major
sections of caches for the exam. Uh, specifically, there are five questions
on address cache translations. So, I still recommend that you master them.
like by master I mean like you need to get them in like two seconds like it
takes you two seconds to do everything the converting to the converting to like
hexodimal to decimal and then the binary etc. I think it should be lickety split
because the advantage to doing this is if you can solve those extremely fast,
you basically just save a lot of time. I thought I I not for the midterms but for
the final I found it really time consuming although I've uh like I found
the time final really timeconuming and if I didn't get page translations and
cash translations really fast I would have run out of time and this could help
in midterm one where if you get them lickety split you have way more time to
think about other questions that might have stumped you
okay because like just to read it it's the same thing each cache transl address
translation question is the same format. He'll give you a hexodimal code and then
you'll be asked to see which block it corresponds to. It's if it's the same
format but just with different numbers. If you can get them really fast, it's
just free points, right? There's just it's just free test questions. Okay,
moving on to optim optimization because this is also a large chunk of your exam.
Optimizations. Compiler optimization changes how a program executes so it can
perform the same work more efficiently. Importantly, the optimized program must
preserve the required behavior of the original program. Choosing a better
algorithm or data structure is still up to the program like the programmer. So
let's say I use a linked list when maybe a hash table is a much more efficient
way of storing things. The compiler cannot optim like even if the compiler
optimizes my linked list, it will still be far slower than if I were to use a
hash table, right? The data it cannot it must preserve the original behavior. So
it cannot just rewrite your code for you and make you have a hash table instead.
What can the what the compiler can't optimize? The compiler will not make a
change if it is unsafe. So we have different obstacles here. Memory
aliasing is an obstacle. Writing through one pointer might change a value access
through another pointer. The compiler cannot tell if memory like if memory
aliasing is prevalent. So it will just play it safe, right? You don't want your
program to break. So it won't optimize obstacles containing memory aliasing.
function side effects. Removing or moving a call might change global
variables, memory or output. Right? So the compiler won't change function side
effects either. It will also not change data dependencies. One calculation may
require the result of an earlier calculation if it does not have the
earlier calculation immediately in its vicinity. It will not it will not play
it like it will won't play aggressively. It will remain safe, right? It won't
change it. floating point rounding. Changing the grouping of a calculations,
changing the grouping of calculations can change the answer, right? So,
generally, it's not that you have to memorize these obstacles or why they
matter, but you have to understand that the cache will always tend to play it
safe. I know in the slides, Professor Benz already walked through a bunch of
examples himself on what what the compiler won't optimize, but just to go
over it again because this is a review session, right? So, we have pointers,
right? Say we have an example int x= 10 and int star p equals the memory address
of x, right? I've made a chart that just breaks down everything what this is
saying, right? So, we have the expression x is the value stored in x
and like I don't know what that amperand X is the address of X. P the address
stored in the pointer. Star P is the value at that address. Star P equals 20
changes X to be equal to 20. Right? More that it points to it. But and then P++
moves the pointer to the next element. Whereas star P in parenthesis++
increments the value the pointer points to, right? This is just review from like
220, right? So track the program. We have array
containing three, five, and seven. And then we have pointer P that points to A.
What does pointer P specifically point to?
>> Yes, the first element of the array, right? So then we have pointer Q that
points to P, right? And then we do P++ pointer Q plus equals the dreference
value of P. Pointer Q plus equals the reference
value of P. And then we do dreference p++ right so on the side I've provided
another table the initial setup p points to a of zero and q that points to p also
points to a of zero right so our array is currently 3 five and seven when we do
p++ a p increments right p increments the
next to the next element of the array so now it's points to a of one whereas q
still points to the initial initial first element of the array so it points
to a of zero, right? But then we when we do star q plus equals to d reference p
now we can see the only thing that's changed now is that we've taken the
value of p and we've added it to q. So now it's now 8, five and seven. They
point to the same array, right? And if we dreference p and plus+ we take
the dreference value of p which in the in the in the array is considered five
and then we increase it by one. So our final array is 867. So an exam question
could 100% be that you track the program and you want to see what it outputs at
the very end. Right? So you need to be comfortable like I
don't know if I was tame in making this question or not but it could definitely
get a lot more complicated. I remember it'd be more complicated where there's
like multiple functions of different variations on the exam and each function
they say they do the same thing but they have different versions of like they
have different versions or different changes that some of them work some of
the functions don't work you have to understand and be able to traverse what
they do or you don't won't get the problem right
so memory aliasing aliasing occurs when different references o access the same
memory location we have int x= 10 and We have we designate a pointer that points
to the memory address of X. Right? We also designate another pointer Q that
also points to the memory address of X. Right? Then we say star Q equals 25. And
then we print the value of P. So what is the value of D reference P after the
program runs? It's going to be 25 because both P and Q point to the memory
address of X. So if you make the pointer at Q modify the value at X since pointer
P also points to the same exact memory address it will also be 25
any questions okay local accumulators reduce repeated
memory rights. This is also something covered in the slides but we have two
example we have two functions right they do basically the same thing. One of them
though has the dreference value of out and we modify out each time, right? Or
not maybe not dreference but you modify the pointer of out to increment the
value that it points to by a of each time, right? Whereas the other example
you make int total and then you increment total by the same values, the
exact same numbers. So while the programs here will produce the exact
same output using a local accumulator means you don't you like you don't have
to go back and search the memory address each and every loop iteration right you
save a lot of you save a lot of memory usage
so using a local accumulator is considered better if like example being
for this they could have an exam question and they could ask what comp
like what optimization would be good here you could say you could use a local
accumulator right that could be that could definitely be an option
Code motion. Code motion moves the computation outside a loop when its
result stays unchanged and moving it preserves behavior. Right? Again, we
have two examples here. They do functionally the same thing, but the
second one at the bottom replaces the memory address of N* I with just base.
Now you only calculate the value of base once at the very start. Long base equals
N * I. So now every loop iteration instead of having to redo n* i, you just
use the pre the preomputated value of base. Note you can only do this for
things that won't change in value. If base changes in value later, you cannot
do this, right? But because base stays the same for the entire loop iteration,
you can instead of doing n times I each and every iteration, you can just do it
once and reuse the same base variable. Any questions?
Okay, reduction in strength replaces an operation with a cheaper equivalent
operation. Examples include replacing multiplication with addition. Right?
Let's say I do 10 * 3 or I can just do 10 + 10 + 10, right? That's the same
thing in our eyes mathematically. But it's not the same thing for a computer.
You can also use bit shifting to replace multiplication and division. But I will
note you can only use bitshifting when it when it prov like revolves around
powers of two, right? because bit shifting is basically multiplying by two
or dividing by two. So shifts can replace suitable. Yeah,
talked about that. So we have an example. We have int y= 10 and it x= y *
3, right? Would replacing y * 3 with y like bit shifting 3 be correct? We
actually have to understand how shifting works. Shifting left by 3 means doing 2
^ 3 which is equal to 8. Right? So if we do 10 * 3 or 10 * 3 we get 30 but if we
do 10 * 8 we get 80 right it is not correct to use the like if we're trying
to do reduction in strength this is not the right way to do it right
you have a question
>> I am unsure actually if you want me to google
Sorry.
>> Y
>> uh possibly. I'm not exactly sure about the math for that, but it it isn't a it
is over complicating the reduction in strength, right? Preferably, we just
replace it with one version of doing it, right? Instead of just doing a left
shift plus Y, you could also just add add Y multiple times and get 30, right?
That's probably the most standard straightforward solution.
Debt code elimination. This is pretty self-explanatory, but if a value is
never used, right, granted sometimes unused values can change the code. That
is just a notice here. But if a value if you like can look through the code and
traverse it and you realize this code doesn't actually do anything you might
as well eliminate it right cuz even if it's dead and it won't
affect the program output it actually still uses computation power right
assigning int x to be equal to three will use power from the PC right as it
go when it tries to compile and tries to do everything.
So you might as well remove it. The compiler does loop unrolling. So loop
unrolling is just a way for it makes it so that you do the work of multiple
loops in one loop. Right? Processes more elements per loop iteration. The total
work for the loop ends up being the same but the loop overhead is reduced. Anyone
care to explain why this happens? Why is the loop overhead reduced? Yes.
>> Yes. Basically, if I have a for loop that goes from let's say zero to 10,
right? But then I do loop unrolling and I do two iterations of loop in one. I
only loop five times now instead of 10 times, right? Loop overhead is reduced.
Index example, both operate under the same accumulator total. The second
addition needs the result of the first creating a dependency chain. This is
very important if you're looking at a loop and rolling question, right? A
processor we learned being supercalar is capable of doing multiple calculations
at once, right? You can start the calculation for A but also start
calculating B and get the answers around the same time in a few clock cycles
instead of having to wait for A to finish solving entirely and then doing
B, right? Everyone remember the supercaler image from lecture slides? I
assume so. Okay. So but doing loop unrolling the way this is currently done
in this example is total the total for the second iteration is based on the
total result of the first iteration right which is bad. It creates a
dependency chain. So now we can't be supercaler. We have to wait for the
first one to fully finish calculating before we start the second one. That is
bad right because you could say loop and rolling is good optimization but if it
actually ends up losing time it's not good.
So what like the solution being we need to have two separate accumulators
instead of total and instead of just using total we can use total one and
total two right and if we have two separate accumulators then it doesn't
actually matter because then on then they're not dependent on each other.
So we have an example here just to demo anything.
Uh I'll let you guys take like a couple seconds maybe like maybe 30 seconds a
minute to look at and understand the example and then I can start asking
questions. The questions are on the side already. Suppose lines 10 to 12 get
replaced with the code segment below. Or suppose lines 14 to 16 get replaced with
the code segment below. If everyone's ready, we can proceed. If
not, I'll give 30 more seconds. Just a general gauge. If you have thumbs up if
you're ready, if thumbs down if you're not.
Okay, I'll give more time. Okay, another show of hands.
All right, overwhelmingly thumbs up. We'll continue. So suppose you've
replaced lines 10 to 12 with what's shown at the code, right? We in total
equals zero. We have a for loop and then we do total plus equals a of i and then
we reassign we reassign the value of total to the pointer out. Right?
So out points to a of 1. So writing to star out also changes the array being
read. Originally star out equals 0 sets a of 1 to zero. Right? The loop then
updates it to 1 to 2 to 5. The replacement adds the original values 1 +
2 + 3 equals 6. Then write six into a of 1. So the new output is 12 then six then
three right this is a problem of memory aliasing it makes like it delay delaying
the rights changes the result. So this would not be a suitable
replacement for whatever is in the code segment.
So what about lines 14 to 16 getting replaced with this right
originally the next value runs three times returning 1 2 and three.
Therefore, extra equals 6 and calls equal three. The replacement calls it
once, then adds the return value three times. 1 plus 1 plus 1 equals three.
Therefore, extra equals 3 and calls equal 1. Our new output is now 8, five,
and 1. Moving the call changes both its side effects and the values added. So,
this is also not a suitable replacement for the code segment.
>> Yes.
>> Uh, that was in the first coverage. Yeah.
>> Okay. So, basically you set it to like we're delaying when
we write to it because we're replacing with a accumulator, right? And delaying
the result makes it so that the value is different.
Yes, but we're delaying when we write to we're delaying when we write to the
actual memory value because we're using an accumulator, right?
>> We like so when we talked about like using an accumulator value, right? We
want we can only do this code motion when the out like when the program
behavior is preserved, right? And so if you run through like I I know this is
like a large example, right? But this is something you have to expect for the
exam in which you need to make sure that the program behavior is maintained,
right? This is not a suitable use. This is not a suitable optimization because
the program behavior is not maintained.
>> Oh, I see. eventually.
>> Yeah,
>> it sets a of one to zero, which it'll make the updating different
if you traverse through it more. Any questions?
Okay, so concept questions. Right on the
midterm one coverage, it says four o'clock, you have Sorry, someone said
something. Okay, you have four concept questions
about pointers, memory aliasing, locality, and compiler optimization/tool
chains. I will note in this review session, I do
not cover chapter 7 of your slides because there's like five questions
about them link like if you if you don't have the
time to study, I would not study chapter 7 super in-depth. There's like one
question about linkers, I think like on the exam for chapter 7 and then that's
part of the tool chain. So if you are going to study anything do for chapter 7
do study the tool chain like what is a linker what is an assembler right the
orderings of the file name like what what is a dot like aas file or LD right
if you are going to study chapter 7 I would study tool chain more than the
linker file in general right the question on global variables also I
believe pertains to chapter 7 if I were to think about it but it's not it's not
the biggest coverage of the exam so I don't cover
So pointers this is just general conceptual questions about pointers.
What is the difference between P star P and like amperand P when P is a pointer.
P is the address stored in the pointer. Star P accesses the object at that
address being a pointer and amperand P is the address of the pointer variable
itself. It is the memory address of the pointer. The pointer and the object it
points to occupy separate memory locations.
How does P++ differ from uh star P++? Does incrementing a pointer always moves
forward by one bite? P++ moves the pointer to the next element of its
pointed to type. For example, if an int occupies four bytes, incrementing an int
star advances the address by four bytes. Star P++ leaves the pointer's address
unchanged and increases the pointed to value by one. I think it's important to
realize this difference though I mean I think most of you probably get
understand this is just 220 right okay when a function receives a pointer
argument can it modify the caller's data can assigning a new address to that
parameter change the caller's pointer the function receives a copy of the
pointer's address it can modify the caller's data by dreferencing that
address right by putting a star next to it however assigning a different address
to the parameter only changes the function local pointer copy. Changing
the caller's pointer itself requires access to that pointer variable,
commonly through a pointer to a pointer. It's probably
too complicated to be on the exam. I I I hopefully wouldn't expect a double
pointer to a pointer question, but it is something to keep in mind.
Does a pointer being non-null guarantee that it is safe to dreference? Answer is
no. A non-null pointer might be uninitialized, point outside a val valid
object or point to memory whose lifetime is ended. For example, freeing allocated
memory does not automatically set every pointer to that memory to null. Such
pointers become dangling pointers and dreferencing them is invalid. So this
goes a little bit into like um memory and like garbage collectors and heaps,
but that's later stuff. Just just try to get the base idea down, right? If it's
safe to do reference or not. Memory aliasing. So, does copying one
pointer into another create a separate copy of the pointer to data? Right? When
you're thinking about memory aliasing and if it works or not in the code
you're reading, this is something important to note. Memory aliasing
occurs when different references access the same memory location. Copying a
pointer copies it address, not the data at that address. Both pointers can
therefore access the same object and a change made through one can be observed
through the other. It's important you get the memory address. they point to
the same memory address, right? Because then they're actually
modifying. And that's actually when you have memory aliasing. If they don't
point to the same memory address, they can't modify each other's data, and it's
not memory aliasing. A program reads through P, writes
through Q, and then reads through P again. Why might the compiler need to
repeat the read? P and Q might point to the same object. The right through Q
could change the value access through P, making the previously loaded value
outdated. Reusing the earlier value is safe only if the compiler can establish
that doing so preserves the program's behavior. Right? This is a combination.
So again, we've established the compiler likes to play it safe, right? So if the
information is not known, then it needs to just call it safe and do more than an
extra read. Why can replacing repeated writes
through an output pointer with a local accumulator change your program's
result? This is that question from earlier, right? The output pointer might
refer to an element of the input array. In the original program, each write
could change a value that a later iteration reads. A local accumulator
delays those writes until the end. So later iterations might read different
values. The optimization is valid only when changing the timing of the rights
preserves behavior. Right? If an input pointer is declared constint
star a, can the compiler assume that the values in the array never change? The
answer is no. This declaration prevents modification through a but another
pointer may still modify the same underlying data if that data is not
itself defined as const. For example, an output pointer could point into the
array. A pointer to const declaration does not establish that the input and
output occupy separate memory. Everyone good?
Okay. If an input pointer is declared const int star a, can the compiler
assume that the values in the array never change?
You can't. Basically, this declaration prevents modification through A, but
another pointer that points to the same array can definitely still modify the
index values of the array. Okay.
Locality. These are just conceptual questions about locality. Now, what is
the difference between spatial locality and temporal locality? Anyone care to
answer before?
>> Yeah. the same value multiple times.
>> Yes, although I will note it's not just in the caches. This is just a concept
everywhere. Spatial locality means accessing locations near one another,
such as consecutive array elements. Temporal locality means accessing the
same location again soon, such as repeatedly looking up the same table
entry. Caches exploit spatial locality by loading entire blocks and temporal
locality by retaining recently accessed data.
Why does sequential array traversal usually have better spatial locality
than linked list traversal? Does using an array automatically guarantee good
locality? Anyone care to answer?
>> Yep.
>> Yes, correct. Array elements occupy consecutive memory locations. So a
loaded cache block often contains several elements that will be accessed
next. Link list nodes may be scattered throughout memory, right? So it's
technically better like it's technically better to not use a linked list, right?
Generally for sequentially traveling arrays. Yeah.
So a stride is just how much you jump forward in a loop.
So an array can still have poor locality if the program accesses widely separate
separated separated elements or uses a large stride that skips most of each
loaded block. To talk more about strides, basically let's say I load
blocks like let's say I load a cache block and it goes from eight of zero to
eight of eight, right? If my stride makes me jump from a eight a of a of
zero to a of 15, I don't have that loaded in my cache block. So, I'm going
to completely skip over that entire loaded chunk, which is bad, right?
That's not a good use of our uh sequential axis
for C two-dimensional array. Why is it usually better for the innermost loop to
change the second index? Does loop variables name matter? Anyone care to
answer?
>> Yep.
>> Yeah. Uh, probably not. Yeah, that's just like
kind of a joke.
>> Basically, these some of these questions are basically review of what I talked
about earlier. This basically covering like the blocking tiling and like loop
ordering section. So yes, C stores two dimensional arrays in row major order.
So consecutive elements within a row or adjacent in memory, right? Keeping the
first index fixed while increasing the second index by one accesses these like
by one accesses those adjacent elements. Right? You want to traverse through the
row not through the column. That's how you keep it sequential and that's how
you have the best locality. Right? What is cache blocking and why can it
improve performance even when a program perform performs the same calculations?
Anyone want to answer? Okay. Cache blocking divides a large
computation into smaller regions of data that can fit in the cache. The program
performs several operations using one region before moving on, increasing the
chance that needed data is still cached. The arithmetic can remain the same while
fewer values must be fetched repeatedly from slower memory. Right? The whole
point of tiling is so you can group things even tighter and that you can
keep referencing it having even better use of temporal and spatial locality.
Right? So blocks that are too large might lose
this benefit because they're just too large to tile at all, but generally
that's not a problem, right? Compiler optimizations. I do not cover
tool chains. Is an unchanged result enough to make moving a calculation
outside a loop safe? Anyone care to answer?
>> Yeah.
>> Yes. The compiler must also consider whether the calculation originally
executes at all and whether moving it changes observable effects. Again, it's
it's it's vital to know that you must maintain the behavior of the program,
right? You need to you need to be methodical when running through each
different function variation you're looking at.
Function A performs one addition and is called millions of times inside a loop.
Function B performs a lengthy calculation and is called once. Which is
generally the stronger candidate for inlining and why? I know I didn't talk
about inlining, but does everyone know what inlining is?
Okay, anyone have any answers? Yeah.
>> Uh, you'd be right. So, function a call and return overhead can account for a
substantial fraction of the work of a tiny function, especially across
millions of calls, right? So inlining function A would be the best because you
call it so many times, right? Whereas function B is only called one time. So
reducing the overhead of searching for it using inlining is not really that
helpful. Whereas the dominant force of why function B takes forever is its
lengthy complex calculation? If a function's return value is unused,
can the compiler automatically remove the function call?
The answer is no. The function might produce output, modify memory, change a
global variable, or perform another observable action. Removing the call
would remove those effects. The compiler may eliminate the call only when it can
establish that doing so preserves the program's required behavior. More of the
same repetition. Just got to drill it in. Does loop unrolling always make a
program faster? What limitations can remain after a loop is unrolled? Anyone
have any answers?
>> Yep. Yes, you can have a dependency chain,
right? If your if the loop unrolling example you were looking at possibly for
the exam contains a dependency chain, you know that it might be slower, right?
That it might not actually be worth it to use loop enrolling there. However, if
they have two separate accumulators, right? If they have some way of working
out that it doesn't create a dependency chain, you're completely fine.
Unrolling reduces loop control overhead by processing multiple elements per
iteration, but dependencies may remain if every operation updates the same
accumulator. It also increases code size and may increase register pressure
because you're doing so many iterations of a loop in only one iteration. Right?
Multiple accumulators can expose more independent work, but performance still
depends on the processor and workload. So the last thing I'm going to cover at
least I think this is the last thing on my slides is physical memory. That's the
last largest chunk you have. I don't cover HDD components but they will be on
the exam. Right. I just think this is just that's HDD components is just a
hard memorization thing. I don't really think there's a point.
>> Yeah. DM or
>> uh not NAND norates from what I can say but SRM and DM might be on the exam.
I won't cover HD components because I think that's just a hard memorization
thing. Same with the same with the definitions earlier. That was really
just a warm-up, right? Actually knowing the definitions of things is just
something you're going to have to hard memorize. Nothing not nothing I can
really help with that. So memory hierarchy right we understand how it
works but just to cover it again we go from fastest access to slowest access
right you have that pyramid here you have the L1 cache L2 cache L3 cache main
memory and then you go to SSDs and HDDs right moving down the hierarchy
generally means greater capacity lower cost per bite and higher access latency
right you can store more information but it is slower to access moving up means
smaller faster and but more expensive storage right caches typically ally use
SRAMM which is fast but relatively inexpensive. Main memory typically uses
DRAM which is denser and cheaper but requires periodic refreshing. It's not
super important to know like the super nitty-gritty details of SRM and DM. You
just have to know what they are. I think registers, caches, and ordinary RAM are
volatile. Anyone know what that is?
>> Yeah.
>> Yes. SSDs and HDDs are nonvatile. So their stored data survives power loss.
Moving from HDD to STD domain memory to DR like to cache access generally
becomes faster, cost per bite increases and typical storage capacity decreases.
Moving down the simplified memory hierarchy generally means slower access,
lower cost per bite, and greater capacity. Just review again, lower
levels also have greater storage density on average. Like it depends on the
machine. It depends sometimes on the machine, but generally speaking, lower
levels also have greater storage density.
Faster memory prioritizes quick access while lower act levels prioritize
storing more data. HDD access time questions are something
you will have on the exam. That is a guarantee. So, you will need to know the
formula. It's also just like it's the same thing as the cache access
questions, but just with a different formula. An HD stores data on rotating
magnetic platters. Each surface contains circular tracks which are divided into
sectors. So you have things like seek time. The read write head moves to the
track containing the requested sector. Rotational latency. Once the head
reaches the track, it waits for the requested sector to rotate underneath
it. You have transfer time. Once the sector reaches the head, the drive reads
its data. So average access time for HDDs are average seek time plus average
rotational latency plus the transfer time. Seems straightforward.
Okay. So we have an example here. Say you have 6,000 RPM, 6 millisecond
average seek time, and 500 sectors per track. So how do you calculate
everything? Full rotation time. You take 60,000 divided by the RPM. That's just a
formula. So you take 60,000 / 6,000 and equals 10 milliseconds. So now we have
the rotation time. Average rotational latency is calculated using full
rotation time divided by two. So in this example, it's 10 divided by two.
transfer time, you have the sectors requested divided by the sectors per
track times the full rotation time. So in this example, it's one divided by
500* 10. So you get 0.02 for one sector. This simplifies to full rotation time
divided by sectors per track. Not super important. So then we combine it all at
the very bottom. Right? We get 6 + 5 + 002 equal 11.02 milliseconds. The
average seek time is given in the question. It cannot be calculated from
RPM. Any questions?
Okay, so this is just a comparison chart
between SS SSDs and HDDs, right? So SSDs use electronic flash memory. I don't
know if Professor Benz covered this, but they use something called pages and they
have a limited number of writes. Not super important right now, but HDDs on
the other hand use a rotating like magnetic rotating platters, right? The
SSDs have no moving parts. While the HDDs do have moving parts, there are no
mechanical access delays in SSDs, right? Whereas an HDD, it needs to move the
read head to the correct sector and track, right? That is all that is time
that is time delay. Random access performance. SSDs
generally perform much better in this access whereas HDDs have slower because
they need to like they have mechanical parts, right? Cost per bite. SSDs are
generally much higher. HDS are just really outdated these days.
physical shock. SSDs are more resistant whereas HDS again mechanical components
they take more if they take damage they're more damaged
wear concerns SSDs have a limited number of rights to them they have a limited
lifespan basically in fact all your computers actually have an SSD the
problem the thing is though for regular consumer use they have so many rights
that it doesn't actually matter you're probably going to throw away the laptop
before it runs out whereas HDS can have mechanical wear and other failures and
they both have non nonvolatile memory. All right,
that is the end of the review. Any questions?
Anything else you want to cover? Yes,
>> the exam.
>> Yes, it covers including to chapter 7. So, you will you will have there will be
questions on linkers. Professor Benz does have the entire question breakdown
on Piaza. All right, if there are no more
questions, you guys are free to go.\